# CVA6 SDK

This repository houses a set of RISCV tools for the [CVA6 core](https://github.com/openhwgroup/cva6). Most importantly it **does not contain openOCD**.

Included tools:
* [Spike](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-isa-sim/), the ISA simulator
* [riscv-tests](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-tests/), a battery of ISA-level tests
* [riscv-fesvr](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-fesvr/), the host side of a simulation tether that services system calls on behalf of a target machine
* [u-boot](https://github.com/openhwgroup/u-boot/)
* [opensbi](https://github.com/riscv/opensbi/), the open-source reference implementation of the RISC-V Supervisor Binary Interface (SBI)

## Quickstart

Requirements Ubuntu:
```console
$ sudo apt-get install autoconf automake autotools-dev curl libmpc-dev libmpfr-dev libgmp-dev libusb-1.0-0-dev gawk build-essential bison flex texinfo gperf libtool patchutils bc zlib1g-dev device-tree-compiler pkg-config libexpat-dev
```

Requirements Fedora:
```console
$ sudo dnf install autoconf automake @development-tools curl dtc libmpc-devel mpfr-devel gmp-devel libusb-devel gawk gcc-c++ bison flex texinfo gperf libtool patchutils bc zlib-devel expat-devel
```
You can select the XLEN by setting it in the Makefile.
Then compile the Linux images with

```console
$ git submodule update --init --recursive
$ make images
```

## Environment Variables

If you want to cross compile other projects for this target you can add `buildroot/output/host/bin/` to your path in order to later make use of the installed tools after compiling them with :

```bash
$ make all
```

## Linux
You can also build a compatible Linux image that boots Linux on the CVA6 fpga mapping:
```bash
$ make vmlinux # make only the elf Linux image
$ make uImage.bin # generate the Linux image with the u-boot wrapper
$ make fw_payload.bin # generate the OpenSBI + U-Boot payload
```

Or you can build everything directly with:

```bash
$ make images # generates all images and save them in install$(XLEN)
```

## Spike
You can test your image on spike 
First, build spike with:

```bash
$ make isa-sim
```

Build the OpenSBI firmware with the Linux payload for the Spike platform:

```bash
$ make spike_payload
```

You can now launch Spike with OpenSBI + Linux

```bash
$ install$(XLEN)/bin/spike install$(XLEN)/spike_fw_payload.elf
```

Spike allows trace logging

```bash
$ install$(XLEN)/bin/spike --log-commits install$(XLEN)/spike_fw_payload.elf 2> trace.log.commits
```

### Booting from an SD card

First compile the SBI firmware and the Linux image:

```bash
$ make images
```

The flash-sdcard Makefile recipe handle the creation of the GPT partition table and the flashing of fw\_payload.bin and uImage at there correct offset. **Be careful to set the correct SDDEVICE.**

```bash
$ sudo -E make flash-sdcard SDDEVICE=/dev/sdb
```

## OS X

Similar steps as above but flashing is sligthly different. Get `sgdisk` using `homebrew`.

```
$ brew install gptfdisk
$ sudo -E make flash-sdcard SDDEVICE=/dev/sdb
```

## OpenOCD - Optional
If you really need and want to debug on an FPGA/ASIC target the installation instructions are [here](https://github.com/riscv/riscv-openocd).

## Ethernet SSH
This patch incorporates an overlay to overcome the painful delay in generating public/private key pairs on the target
(which happens every time because the root filing system is volatile). Do not use these keys on more than one device.
Likewise it also incorporates a script (rootfs/etc/init.d/S40fixup) which replaces the MAC address with a valid Digilent
value. This should be replaced by the unique value on the back of the Genesys2 board if more than one device is used on
the same VLAN. Needless to say both of these values would need regenerating for anything other than development use.

# Docker Container

There is a pretty basic Docker container you can use to get a stable build environment to build the image.

```
$ cd container
$ sudo docker build -t ghcr.io/pulp-platform/ariane-sdk -f Dockerfile .
```

And build the image:
```
$ cd ..
$ sudo docker run -it -v `pwd`:/repo -w /repo -u $(id -u ${USER}):$(id -g ${USER}) ghcr.io/pulp-platform/ariane-sdk
```

# AlSaqr

## Context

This "guide" provides some context and the steps needed

  1. to generate the `fw_payload.elf` image containing OpenSBI + Linux,
  2. to run Linux on FPGA and possibly also on the chip.

Some context: Linux's boot procedure is pretty much standardized, the default flow for embedded systems is the one
highlighed in slide 7 [here](https://riscv.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Summit_bootflow.pdf), and it is the one also leveraged by the
default version of this repo:

  1. the zero-stage-bootloader (ZSBL) is the bare-metal code inside the BootRom, which should load the first-stage-bootloader (FSBL) and the device binary tree (DTB)
  into the scratchpad
  2. the FSBL is a bare-metal application, generated by UBoot (`u-boot-spl`) according to the target platform configuration stored there
  3. in Shaheen, the ZSBL was basically loading the FSBL through JTAG (for example)
  4. the FSBL would load from Xilinx's SPI flash the image containing OpenSBI with UBoot as payload
  5. finally UBoot would load Linux's image from the flash and then jump there.

This bootflow is the one supported at this commit [here](https://github.com/AlSaqr-platform/cva6-sdk/tree/shaheen-v1.0), as you can see from the modifications done to UBoot
to be aligned with the FPGA hardware (i.e., to know which and where the SPI flash is and so on).

## Guide

However, for alsaqr the hardware is under development and the boot-flow is dependent on opentitan. Thus, we just want to:

  1. generate the `fw_payload.elf` image containing OpenSBI + Linux,
  2. load the image and the DTB
  3. run Linux on FPGA (and possibly also on the chip).

In pratice, the ZSBL will be the JTAG loading the image, and then we'll jump directly to the OpenSBI and then to the linux kernel. To do so:

Requirements Ubuntu:
```console
$ sudo apt-get install autoconf automake autotools-dev curl libmpc-dev libmpfr-dev libgmp-dev libusb-1.0-0-dev gawk build-essential bison flex texinfo gperf libtool patchutils bc zlib1g-dev device-tree-compiler pkg-config libexpat-dev
```

Requirements Fedora:
```console
$ sudo dnf install autoconf automake @development-tools curl dtc libmpc-devel mpfr-devel gmp-devel libusb-devel gawk gcc-c++ bison flex texinfo gperf libtool patchutils bc zlib-devel expat-devel
```
You can select the XLEN by setting it in the Makefile.
Then compile the Linux images with

```console
$ git submodule update --init --recursive
$ make uImage
```

This will generate Linux's image, containing also the root file system, at `install64/Image`.

This image will be opensbi's payload. To generate the full image:

```
make fw_payload.bin
```

At this point, we'll have `fw_payload.elf` inside the `install64` folder, which is the desider binary.

It is only left to generate the bitstream:

```
make alsaqr.dtb
```

Please note that you need to load it at the address defined in openSBI (`FW_PAYLOAD_FDT_ADDR=0x82200000`
in the `platform/fpga/alsaqr/objects.mk` file).

This is achieved by the `load_image alsaqr.dtb 0x82200000` inside openocd's config.

```
init
reset halt

halt
load_image alsaqr.dtb 0x82200000

echo "Ready for Remote Connections"
```

## Important

The baudrate is set to `38400`, configure your screen/minicom accordingly.

To speed up the code loading, try to increase the adapter speed inside the openocd cfg.

Last bitstream tested from [this](https://github.com/AlSaqr-platform/he-soc/tree/e7ac6ada9f9e6a3c21e2ed1a865c4e437706ff94) commit.